Fatima bint Muhammad Al-Fihriyya Al-Qurashiya was an Arab woman who is credited with founding the al-Qarawiyyin mosque in 859 AD in Fez, Morocco. She is also known as "Umm al-Banayn". Al-Fihri died around 880 AD. The Al-Qarawiyyin mosque subsequently developed a teaching institution, which became the University of al-Qarawiyyin in 1963.Her story is told by Ibn Abi Zar' (d. between 1310 and 1320) in The Garden of Pages (Rawd al-Qirtas) as founding the Qarawiyyin Mosque. Since she was first mentioned many centuries after her death, her story has been hard to substantiate, and it has been speculated it might be ahistorical.Fatima used the money inherited from her father to built the Al-Qarawiyyin Mosque, named for the immigrants from her city. Her sister Maryam built the Andalusian Mosque, named for the immigrants from the city of Andalusia, present-day southern Spain.[8] Although they started out as mosques, or religious gathering places for Muslims, Fatima's community had outgrown their mosque and she vowed to build a new and larger one. Fatima used the money she inherited from her father to purchase a mosque that was built around 845 AD under the supervision of King Yahya ibn Muhammad. She then rebuilt it and bought the surrounding land, doubling its size.The construction project was supervised by Fatima herself. As Tunisian historian Hassan Hosni Abdelwahab noted in his book Famous Tunisian Women: "She committed to only using the land she had purchased. She dug deep into the land, unearthing yellow sand, plaster, and stone to use, so as not to draw suspicion from others [for using too many resources].The mosque took 18 years to construct.[9] According to Moroccan historian Abdelhadi Tazi, Al-Fihri fasted until the project's completion. When it was finished, she went inside and prayed to God, thanking him for his blessings.She named it after the immigrants from her hometown of Kairouan. According to tradition, Fatima's sister Mariam also founded a similar mosque in the district across the river the same year (859), with help from local Andalusian families, which became known as the Al-Andalusiyyin Mosque (Mosque of the Andalusians)
